---
categories: ['exceptions', 'assertions']
---

{% include toc %}

## For Next Time

On Monday you'll be sending your code to instructors for a code review. We'll work on a framing document for the exercise in class next time, but for now you should make sure you have a solid body of work completed and committed before then.

## "The Goodies" Debrief

[Think Python Chapter 19](http://www.greenteapress.com/thinkpython2/html/thinkpython2020.html) includes some very useful Python odds and ends that can help you write powerful, efficient, "Pythonic" programs.

* list comprehensions and generator expressions
* `any` and `all` reduction functions
* sets and library types (Counter, defaultdict, namedtuple)
* gather and scatter operators, e.g. ```def my_function(*args, **kwd): ...``` 

## Exceptions and Assertions

* Read about [Exceptions]({% link _notebooks/Exceptions.md %}) and try some examples
  * **Exercise**: Examine your system architecture diagram for the final project and identify places where errors are likely to occur - make a list and be specific. Common culprits include anywhere you take input from a user, from the web, a database, or the filesystem. Decide what types of exceptions should be raised in each case and how they should be handled. Implement at least one exception in your code.
* Read about [Assertions]({% link _notebooks/Assertions.md %}) and try some examples
  * **Exercise**: Take 2-3 of your functions from the final project (or a past miniproject) and make your assumptions explicit by adding assertions. There's a bit of an art to using assertions - if you defensively try to account for every single thing that could go wrong you'll wind up with an unreadable mountain of tests for a small amount of code. Try to aim for the most impactful checks - things most likely to go wrong/be misused, and those most likely to be difficult to debug if used incorrectly.

