---
categories: ['exceptions', 'assertions', 'git']
---

{% include toc %}

## For Next Time

 - No Reading Journal assigned for Tuesday
 - Submit MP3 code, reflection, and slide (note the "Live presentation line" in slide deck)

## Reading Journal Debrief

 * [How to write a Git commit message](https://chris.beams.io/posts/git-commit/)
 * [Check In Early, Check In Often](https://blog.codinghorror.com/check-in-early-check-in-often/)

Since you'll be working with a partner on MP4, good Git habits are all the more important. As you first start working together, you should discuss some team ground rules and expectations, including version control practices.


## Exceptions

Read about [Exceptions]({% link _notebooks/Exceptions.md %}) and try some examples

**Exercise**: Examine your code for MP3 and identify places where errors are likely to occur - make a list and be specific. Common culprits include anywhere you take input from a user, from the web, a database, or the filesystem. Decide what types of exceptions should be raised in each case and how they should be handled. Try implementing at least one exception in your code.

## Assertions

Read about [Assertions]({% link _notebooks/Assertions.md %}) and try some examples

**Exercise**: Take 2-3 of your functions from MP3 (or a past miniproject) and make your assumptions explicit by adding assertions. There's a bit of an art to using assertions - if you defensively try to account for every single thing that could go wrong you'll wind up with an unreadable mountain of tests for a small amount of code. Try to aim for the most impactful checks - things most likely to go wrong/be misused, and those most likely to be difficult to debug if used incorrectly.


## Git merge conflicts

Since you'll soon have more than one person working on code at the same time, you may encounter a situation where each of you have made modifications to the same file.
When this happens, you need to go through a process to decide how to blend these changes together into a single new version.
Read about [resolving merge conflicts](https://help.github.com/articles/resolving-a-merge-conflict-using-the-command-line/).

## Git branches

What is the "master" in `git push origin master`? It's the name of a [branch](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/using-branches/git-checkout)!

Developers often use branches to work on a new feature (without halting ongoing development on the master branch). Then once the feature is complete and tested, they can merge it back into master.

To see this visually, work through the first three levels of "[Learn Git Branching](https://learngitbranching.js.org/)"

