---
categories: [bio research, git, unit testing, studio time]
---

{% include toc %}

## GeneFinder Guest Lecture: Joanne Pratt

[Dr. Pratt](http://www.olin.edu/faculty/profile/joanne-c-pratt/)
will provide some additional biological context for the GeneFinder miniproject
and introduce us to research tools we will use to investigate candidate protein sequences.

[Salmonella slides (PDF)]({% link files/notes/day3/Salmonella.pdf %})

Going Beyond exercise related to material in the talk and MP1:
- [Protein BLAST](https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?PAGE=Proteins)
- [BLAT genome search](https://genome.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgBlat?command=start)

Mystery sequence 1:

```
MEASYERGRPRAARQHSRDGHDHHVRARSSSRENYRGEYRQSRSASQVRVPTVFHKKRVEPLTVPPAPKDICPTLKKGFLCDSSFCKKDHQLESLTDRELLLLIARKTCGSVEQQLNITAPKDSRLANPTADDFQQEEGPKITLLTLIKTAEHWARQDIRTIEDSKLRALLTLCAVMTRKFSKSQLSLLCETHLRREGLGQDQAEPVLEVYQRLHSDKGGSFEAALWQQWDRQSLIMFITAFLNIALQLPCESSAVVVSGLRTLVPQSDNEEASTNPGTCSWSDEGTP
```

Mystery sequence 2:

```
MTRKRTYWVPNSSGGLVNRGIDIGDDMVSGLIYKTYTLQDGPWSQQERNPEAPGRAAVPPWGKYDAALRTMIPFRPKPRFPAPQPLDNAGLFSYLTVSWLTPLMIQSLRSRLDENTIPPLSVHDASDKNVQRLHRLWEEEVSRRGIEKASVLLVMLRFQRTRLIFDALLGICFCIASVLRPILIIPKILEYSEEQLGNVVHGVGLCFALFLSECVKSLSFSSSWIINQRTAIRFRAAVSSFAFEKLIQFKSVIHITSGEAISFFTGDVNYLFEGVCYGPLVLITCASLVICSISSYFIIGYTAFIAILCYLLVFPLAVFMTRMAVKAQHHTSEVSDQRIRVTSEVLTCIKLIKMYTWEKPFAKIIEDLRRKERKLLEKCGLVQSLTSITLFIIPTVATAVWVLIHTSLKLKLTASMAFSMLASLNLLRLSVFFVPIAVKGLTNSKSAVMRFKKFFLQESPVFYVQTLQDPSKALVFEEATLSWQQTCPGIVNGALELERNGHASEGMTRPRDALGPEEEGNSLGPELHKINLVVSKVALFRPRRQASCQALRT
```

## Git, GitHub, and New Reading Journals

We'll continue talking more about git, developing a mental model of how version control works and how to use it, and getting some practice by setting yourself up with the third Reading Journal, which is available for you to bring to your own Github repository and laptop.

**References**
 - AmGit by Allen Downey: [Chapter 1](https://github.com/AllenDowney/amgit/blob/master/en/01-introduction/01-chapter1.markdown), [Chapter 2](https://github.com/AllenDowney/amgit/blob/master/en/02-git-basics/01-chapter2.markdown)
 - Additional [git resources](/resources/#git)


## Reading Journal Chats with Different Peers

You will be doing Reading Journals on your own as you complete all of the four Mini-Projects. We change the students who are in each studio room as we transition between each Mini-Project.
With the open time that we have during studio, we encourage you to talk with two or three people sitting around you - about recently submitted Reading Journals. You can identify questions or difficulties and try to talk/work through them. You can show what you might think have been an elegant or unorthadoxed approach to a question.
You can tell any of the instructors or course assistants what you think would be useful for clarifying common confusions. You can also explore whether others want to work alongside you for completing future Reading Journals.


## Intro to Unit Testing
Testing our functions interactively in the interpreter as we write them is great for quick tests.

As we move to more advanced functions and programs, we'd like to add several more features. We might want to save the tests, to run them again as our implementation changes. We might even want to write the tests ahead of time, an approach known as test-driven design.

Today, we'll explore unit tests, and help you understand how they are a part of MP1. These short tests let us verify each piece of a program independently, which makes it more likely the entire program will be correct once we put everything together. You will be given some starter unit tests in mini-project 1, and will add your own to this (and future) project(s).

We will be using the [doctest](https://docs.python.org/3.7/library/doctest.html) Python module, which makes code examples in Python docstrings into unit tests automatically.

### Running doctests
Doctests can be run in normal mode, in which only failing tests will be reported, or in verbose mode, which reports results from all tests.

Let's assume you've written a program called `my_prog.py` that contains some doctests. In order to run those tests, there are (at least) three approaches:

#### Command line
You can test your program directly from the command line by running

```bash
$ python3 -m doctest [-v] my_prog.py
```

where the `[-v]` means you can either include the -v verbose flag or not.

#### Within program
You can also run doctests from inside your program, by including:

```python
import doctest
doctest.testmod(verbose=True)
```

at the bottom of `my_prog.py`.

You will often see this nested within a block:

```python
if __name__ == "__main__":
    ...
```

so that the test code is only executed if the program is run directly, and not if it is imported by another program (we'll talk more about this later).

#### Single function
It is also possible to run the doctests for just a single function, rather than all doctests in the file. This is sometimes useful in Reading Journals or when doing early development, so you are not flooded with known errors from other parts of your program. Just be sure to go back to running **all** of the tests in your program before you submit.

To do this, include:

```python
import doctest
doctest.run_docstring_examples(my_function, globals(), verbose=False)
```

in `my_prog.py`, where `my_function` is the function with doctests that you want to test, and verbose can be `True` or `False`.


> Exercise - Designing a Reasonable Test: Add unit tests to the functions you wrote for the reading journal and verify their correctness.  Before you start typing out your unit tests, take a minute to think through what would constitute a good set of unit tests for each function.


## Unit Testing in the Wild
Do you have any best practices that you'd like to share with the class from using unit tests in other environments?


## Unit Testing Questions

While you are beginning to explore unit testing in class activities and in
the Gene Finder starter code, keep in mind a few questions so that you can examine their role in how you might design software.

1. In what ways, if any, are you finding unit tests to be helpful as you code?
2. What role does unit testing play in determining whether or not your program is correct? (This may vary depending on the program.)
3. Which, if any, aspects of the Python module you are using for unit testing do you find unwieldy or suited for a re-design (what could make the tool better)?

## Open studio time

Please use instructors and course assistants in the studio for questions and approaches
as you work on MP1.
