---
categories: [design decision challenges, MP3 consulting]
---

{% include toc %}

## Today

* Design Decision Challenge in groups
* MP3 consulting time


## For Next time
* Please complete [MP2 reflection and teaming survey](https://forms.gle/sRZWKo9CmuhpJ6jt6)
* Next class will be the midpoint of MP3.
Take a look at the [suggested milestones](/assignments/mini-project-3-text-mining.html#suggested-milestones) to make sure you're on track.
While there's not an official midpoint submission due, we strongly recommend checking in with course staff about your ideas, plans, and questions.


## Design Decision Challenge in groups
Today we pilot an interaction style for class that the teaching team has been workshopping amongst ourselves.
We aim to provide opportunities to go hands-on work as a class that allow us to:
* develop more skill at walking through code for small challenges to increase understanding of core concepts.
* define what constitutes a reasonable outcome with respect to a metric such as speed or memory required.
* practice measuring outcomes of decisions to justify one approach over another for different contexts.


## Setting up working groups
* Half of the class moves to a set of chairs close to the west whiteboard.
* The other half of the class moves to chairs near the east whiteboard.
* An instructor sitting with the east group will explain Task E, then introduce two different ways of carrying out the task in Python.
* A different instructor sitting with the west group will explain Task W, then introduce two different ways of carrying out the task in Python.


## Working through tasks for 30 minutes
* Students in each group will spend 10 minutes producing and/or inspecting code for Approach 1
* Students will spend 4 minutes measuring how fast Approach 1 runs for the context provided.
* Students in each group will spend 10 minutes producing and/or inspecting code for Approach 2
* Students will spend 4 minutes measuring how fast Approach 2 runs for the context provided.
* Students will contrast approaches to determine which might be most appropriate for similar tasks.


## Design debriefs
* East group splits into two smaller east subgroups, west also splits into two subgroups.
* One east subgoup goes to the west whiteboard, sending back a west subgroup to sit with the east subgroup that remained at the east whiteboard.
* At each whiteboard, the Task E students will once again split in half, grouping up with half of the Task W folks.
* Instructors will tell one Task E group at a whiteboard to talk to the Task W subgroup members about how Approach 1 to Task E worked out for their context.
* Instructors will tell the other Task E subgroup at the same whiteboard to talk to the Task W subgroup members about how Approach 2 to Task E worked out for their context.
* Task E students spend 5 minutes telling Task W students what tradeoffs they made for the approach they're assigned to.
* Task W students are assigned approaches and then spend 5 minutes telling Task W students what tradeoffs they made for the approach they're assigned to.


## Quick reflection
The students give us verbal feedback to help us improve the design decision challenge process.


## Bad Kangaroos

In this Reading Journal we looked at a very common error that can be very frustrating to debug:

```python
class Kangaroo:
    def __init__(self, name, contents=[]):	# Warning: mutable default argument bug!
        self.pouch_contents = contents
```

The core "[gotcha](http://docs.python-guide.org/en/latest/writing/gotchas/#mutable-default-arguments)" here is that default argument values are evaluated *once* when the function is defined, not every time it is called.

In this case, it means that the new list is created one time, and each new `Kangaroo` instance (that did not provide contents to override the default) has a reference to the same list.

This would be true of any mutable object as a default argument, not just `list` (e.g. `dict`, or your custom classes). Here is another implementation, showing a Python idiom commonly used to avoid this bug:

```python
class Kangaroo:
    def __init__(self, name, contents=None):
        if contents == None:
            contents = []
        self.pouch_contents = contents
```

Here we've used `None` (immutable) as a stand-in for the case when no contents have been passed and we should create an empty list. The new list is created inside the body of the `__init__` method when it is called, so each `Kangaroo` instance gets its own empty list vs a shared reference.

> **General advice**: avoid using mutable objects as default values of function arguments.

----


## Going beyond on the reading journal agenda: sorting objects

For this Reading Journal, you had to implement a `print_agenda` method that displays `Event` objects in chronological order.
The key challenge here was sorting the `Event`s: Python provides many
[techniques for sorting](https://docs.python.org/3/howto/sorting.html),
but they don't know how to sensibly sort your custom objects without some help from you.

Let's imagine that you have a list of `Event`s.
The first design choice to make is whether you should maintain the list in sorted order at all times, or sort it only when required (e.g. whenever `print_agenda` is called). There are pros and cons to each style, depending on application:


#### Always sorted

In this case the burden falls on your `add_event` method to ensure that you insert new `Event`s in chronological order (perhaps using your `is_after` method). It takes a little more time to add an `Event`, but you afterwards you can rely on the list being sorted at no extra cost.


#### Sort on demand

With this approach you have a simpler insertion process, but you must sort the list every time you need it to be in order. This may be more expensive depending on whether adding new `Event`s or printing the `Agenda` is more common.


Python knows how to sort built-in types (e.g. integers), but not your custom classes. Let's say you have a `Time` class:

```python
class Time:
    def __init__(self, hour=0, minute=0, second=0):
        self.hour = hour
        self.minute = minute
        self.second = second

    def to_int(self):
        return 60*(60*self.hour + self.minute) + self.second
```


#### Sorting key function
Python's `list.sort` method and `sorted` function both take an optional `key` parameter, which expects a function that takes the object to be sorted and returns a key used to sort it. We could write such a function for `Event`s:

```python
def event_start(event):
    """Given Event object containing a start Time, return time as sortable key"""
    return event.start.to_int()
```

and then use it to sort a list of Events:

```python
for event in sorted(some_events, key=event_start):
    ... do something
```


#### Anonymous lambda functions

If you just want to sort `Event`s, it can be a bit clunky to write the `event_start` function solely to pass as a `key` parameter.
You'll often see people use an anonymous `lambda` function (a function defined on the fly that is not bound to a name) for this purpose. Equivalently:

```python
for event in sorted(some_events, key=lambda e: e.start.to_int())
    ... do something
```


#### Implement comparison operator(s)

If you implement the less-than [\_\_lt\_\_](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#object.__lt__) method for your classes (so that `time1 < time2` works), then Python now knows how to sort your custom objects.

```python
# inside class Time:
    def __lt__(self, other):
        return self.to_int() < other.to_int()
```



----


### Agenda: \_\_str\_\_ vs \_\_repr\_\_

You might have observed the following behavior when trying to print your Time class using the `__str__` method:

```python
>>> times = [Time(6,20), Time(2,45), Time(4)]
>>> print(times[0])
06:20:00
>>> print(times)
[<__main__.Time object at 0x105b1d0b8>, <__main__.Time object at 0x105b1d0f0>, <__main__.Time object at 0x105b1d128>]
```

This arises because Python has two ways of converting an object into a string that are used differently. Read about each:
[\_\_str\_\_](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#object.__str__)
and
[\_\_repr\_\_](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#object.__repr__).


When printing collections like lists, the `__repr__` method is used for the contained objects. As an example of why, let's imagine we have a `TicTacToe` class with a pretty `__str__` method that gives:

```python
X| |O
-----
 |X|O
-----
O|X|
```

Very nice way to visualize the state of one Tic Tac Toe board - who needs a Graphical User Interface?

But, if we used that same representation for the `__repr__` and printed a list of two `TicTacToe` objects, it would be a mess!:

```python
[X| |O
-----
 |X|O
-----
O|X| , X| |O
-----
 |X|O
-----
O|X| ]
```

vs

```python
[<__main__.TicTacToe object at 0x105b1d160>, <__main__.TicTacToe object at 0x105b1d168>]
```

When writing `__repr__` methods, a great goal is for the result to be a valid Python expression that could recreate the object (e.g. `Time(6,20,0)` not `06:20:00`).
In Python speak, ideally `eval(repr(obj)) == obj`.

If a class does not define a `__str__` method, the `__repr__` method is used instead (if it exists).
If neither exists, Python defaults to `<ClassName object at 0x(memory address)>`.

>**In short**:
> - output of `__str__` should be "nicely printable
> - output of `__repr__` should be "information-rich and unambiguous", and if possible should be valid Python to recreate the object

----


## Text Mining consulting

By [this point in MP3](/assignments/mini-project-3-text-mining.html#suggested-milestones) we hope that you've thought of an interesting topic to investigate and tried out a couple of relevant text data sources (note that these don't have to be the ones that you stick with for the project).

One great next step would be to generate an extensive list of interesting questions you might explore via your data set.
Using this list, you can prioritize different analysis techniques that can help you address your questions.
It's helpful to have a longer list of topics than you'll actually pursue, since as you begin to investigate you're likely to find that some may not pan out and others may have disappointing results.

We **strongly** suggest that you consult with course staff to share your project idea, potential data sources, list of research questions, and analysis strategies.
We can help by suggesting related alternatives you may not have considered and by estimating the relative difficulty of potential approaches.
