---
categories: [public repos]
---

{% include toc %}


Studio Time for Day 25
 - interacting with instructors is optional, but encouraged


## For all students
   * moving SoftDes projects out of private repos into public repos
     * good for showing portfolios to
       * peers
       * parents
       * partners, and
       * potential employers

## Starting point for your class repos
 * The SoftDes teaching team has considers three main options for setting up our students to manage their code on a version control + collaboration platform (github.com in our case)
   * make every project viewable by anyone (public) from the first day of class
   * make initial assignments viewable only to individual students + instructors, then make later assignments be public-facing
   * make every assignment private (only individuals and instructors can view)
 * This year's teaching team elected to make every coding assignment private
   * we give all students the option to reveal their work in public repos, after weighing several important considerations


## Considerations for revealing code publicly
 * Does any version of this code share information that should not be public?
   * remember that sites such as github give viewers the ability to view older versions of your code
     * look back to explore whether you pushed a file that had early comments that you thought were funny notes to yourself, but might be considered bad taste by others. You have removed the comments in later commits. You can reveal your code in a number of ways that remove a portion of the commit history if you choose to do so, just in case. Notes on that are below.
   * are any of my API keys exposed? Were they ever in any version I accidentally pushed?
   * did I work with others on the code I am making public?
     * have collaborators given me the OK to make the code public?
     * am I crediting other people's code that I/we used?
   * do I want to make my learning visible?
     * I started with some very questionable code that I would be embarrassed by if friends / employers saw
       * we want you to have a safe place to learn and explore, so you can leave that part behind if you'd like, or show it off to signal to everyone that you are a fast learner - which is important. Everyone started out as a questionable coder at some point :)
   * is the code a work piece or a showpiece?
     * do I want to show code that is still being worked on - and may be in non-functional states a lot? See branching notes below


## Mechanics for revealing code
 * The SoftDes teaching team does not have the ability to make your repo public after you created it
   * you can generally change the settings of repos that you own from private to public and vice versa
 * If you want to leave previous commits (and unflattering comments) behind in a private repo, you can copy and paste code into a brand new repo and your public history will begin there
 * If you want to keep a commit history and take a group project and your own version to go public with and modify as you see fit, you can duplicate it with [these instructions](https://help.github.com/en/github/creating-cloning-and-archiving-repositories/duplicating-a-repository)
 * If you want to keep your code looking polished in a repo, you can make branches as your exploratory workspaces and let viewers marvel at the master branch while you do so. This [branching resource](https://learngitbranching.js.org/?locale=en_US) is a good place to learn


## Specifically for breadth students
  * Work on [Worksheet 4 Assignment](https://canvas.instructure.com/courses/1804687/assignments/14719531) due Friday 10PM EST
  * This week’s new worksheets that you can pull from the ReadingJournal repo are:
  * A new [Git worksheet](https://github.com/sd2020spring/ReadingJournal/blob/master/git_worksheet.ipynb) is available to complete
  * A new [Debugging worksheet](https://github.com/sd2020spring/ReadingJournal/blob/master/debugging_worksheet.ipynb) is also available
  * Previously published option for worksheets:
    * [Data science](https://github.com/sd2020spring/ReadingJournal/blob/master/data_science_worksheet.ipynb)
    * [Testing your code](https://github.com/sd2020spring/ReadingJournal/blob/master/testing_worksheet.ipynb)
    * [Classes+Inheritance](https://github.com/sd2020spring/ReadingJournal/blob/master/inheritance.ipynb)
    * [Documenting projects](https://github.com/sd2020spring/ReadingJournal/blob/master/documentation_worksheet.ipynb)


## Specifically for depth students
  * Work on your [draft of your project website assignment](https://canvas.instructure.com/courses/1804687/assignments/13970634)
  due Friday at 10am EST
  * build your depth project page as public-facing
    * you will still need to follow steps to reveal code from the repo to the public
