---
categories: [project page check-ins]
---

Studio Time for Day 26 - project page reactions


## Specifically for depth students
  * we'll review the project pages that you drafted during regular time slots (5 min)
  * we will also revisit outstanding issues that have come up at or since our code review (5min)
  * we encourage students to attend during the depth slots that we have been using, so that we can react to first drafts.
    * final websites will be due 6 days after the class session
  * we can discuss the considerations of making the code public to accompany your page or not (or which parts), according to considerations below.
    * 11:00-11:10 Nathan, Adi
    * 11:10-11:20 Regan, Jason
    * 11:20-11:30 Jonas, Kelly, Jasper
    * 11:30-11:40 Alex Butler, Declan Ketchum
    * 11:40-11:50 Sam, Hazel
    * 11:50-12:00 Oscar De La Garza, Nabih
    * 12:00-12:10 Jackie Zeng, Rohil Agarwal
    * 12:10-12:20 Patrick, Tolu
    * 12:20-12:30 Kate, Rishita, Prisha


## Considerations for revealing code publicly
 * Does any version of this code share information that should not be public?
   * remember that sites such as github give viewers the ability to view older versions of your code
     * look back to explore whether you pushed a file that had early comments that you thought were funny notes to yourself, but might be considered bad taste by others. You have removed the comments in later commits. You can reveal your code in a number of ways that remove a portion of the commit history if you choose to do so, just in case. Notes on that are below.
   * are any of my API keys exposed? Were they ever in any version I accidentally pushed?
   * did I work with others on the code I am making public?
     * have collaborators given me the OK to make the code public?
     * am I crediting other people's code that I/we used?
   * do I want to make my learning visible?
     * I started with some very questionable code that I would be embarrassed by if friends / employers saw
       * we want you to have a safe place to learn and explore, so you can leave that part behind if you'd like, or show it off to signal to everyone that you are a fast learner - which is important. Everyone started out as a questionable coder at some point :)
   * is the code a work piece or a showpiece?
     * do I want to show code that is still being worked on - and may be in non-functional states a lot? See branching notes below
